So with variables we saw how we could create something which contained a value and then we could change
that value later on and use it in our code to achieve something.
Arrays take variables one step further and allow us to store a number of different values in one object.
Now that sounds a bit weird until you've seen it in action so let's just tidy things up a little and
create an array.
There's a few different ways of creating a raise in javascript.
I'm going to show you the most common ones here.
We actually use the keyword Val as before to create them so arrays are just variables but different
types of variables and we'll call it my array.
And then to tell javascript's that we want to create an array we use the command new and then array
and we use parentheses because this is a function which creates an array for us.
So now we've got an empty array and we want to fill it with some values.
So let's say we want to store some food items in this particular array for some reason.
What we would do is we would take my array and specify which entry in the array we wanted to edit and
we normally start with 0.
So arrays start at 0.
My array and then squared back brackets zero and then we might set that equal to pizza.
So just in the same way that we set the value of a variable we can set the value of one item within
an array.
So my array 0 is now pizza.
Can you set my array one to chocolate.
Go for it
let's have a look.
You should have done something like Mirei square brackets.
One is the cruelty chocolate that get.
So how do we get those values if we want them.
Well just in the same way that we worked with variables in the previous video.
So if we want to get pizza we get alerts my array is there just like that.
Let's refresh and then we've got pizza that note if we want to view a whole array that's not that easy
to do within the page itself but it's very easy to do within the console.
So that's how I'd recommend if you want to check what the values of an array are.
While you're coding then you can use the console log.
And this is a very useful thing in general.
It essentially allows you to leave comments for yourself as you're developing your app which can help
you with debugging or just generally seeing what's going on.
And if we want to log the values within an array we just consult a log.
And then my array in parentheses and this can have a look obviously that doesn't display anything on
the page itself.
But if we right click control click and inspect and then click on the so it should show us.
There we go.
So it's array.
It's got two values in it and those two values are pizza and chocolate.
Notice also we've got the length of the array which is two and that's a very useful number to know how
many items that are in your array and we can get them just by using Mirei dot length.
So that will tell us how many items there are in the array.
If we have a look at that can see we just get returned because we've got two items in our right here.
All right.
So that's all well and good you might think but why on earth would I need one of these why can I just
do all these individual variables.
Well imagine you're making something like a Twitter clone and you wanted to display a user's tweets
as you're writing the program.
You don't know in advance how many tweets there are going to be because the number is going to change.
Also you definitely don't want to define a new variable for each tweet because you're going to have
to come up with a huge number of variable names.
Would be a very messy way to work with things.
So instead what you could do is create an array which we might call tweets and we're going to create
this in a different way just so you can see a different way to create an array.
So instead of using new array we can actually just assign the values of the array right at the start.
So incidentally just a pair of square brackets there will create an empty array.
So it does the same thing as that line.
But if you want to put some values in we might have this sort of thing people might tweet.
Morning everybody.
Something like that.
And they might say I love coffee that kind of thing.
What a Twitter feed this would be.
So now what we've got here is two tweets within our tweets array and hopefully this gives you a bit
of a clue as to why arrays are so powerful.
We could add as many tweets as we wanted to display them all we could delete ones we can edit them but
we only have a single variable name to deal with.
And it kind of makes sense.
It's just a single variable called tweets.
We don't need a different variable name for each of these because they're all tweets.
So pretty much any web app you could imagine is going to need arrays to store lots of data.
So you think of an email client for example has to store the user's contacts the users e-mails and all
sorts of other information that you don't know how many items there are going to be.
And in that situation are razor perfect.
So it's a very quick challenge.
Can you alert the I love coffee tweet just to make sure that you've got the hang of how arrays work.
Go for it.
All right.
Hey you did it pretty easy.
Just alert.
And then we want tweets one that was the only slight trick you might have forgotten the arrays start
at zero.
And for that that was number one and then attempted to alert tweets to and then got an error because
tweets to doesn't exist.
So this is tweets zero.
And I love coffee is tweets one let's just have a look.
There we go.
Brilliant.
So what if we want to add a third tweet to our list.
So how user has just come along and tweeted something just as exciting as these two tweets and we want
to add it to their list of tweets.
That's pretty easy.
We can use the command push so tweets don't push.
We'll add a third item to this array at the end of the array and then we give the value that we want
to add onto the end of our suites array.
So what's the sort of thing this guy might say.
Maybe something like back to work because he's hilarious.
So that will add back to work onto the end of the array.
So very quickly can you look to the console.
The tweets.
So we can have a look and see what's inside it now.
If you remember it that it's just so dot log and then whatever we want to log.
So in this case the tweets are right.
Let's take a look refresh the page and then control it right click and inspect
and there we go.
So there's our array it's got a length of three so three items in it.
Morning everybody.
I love coffee and back to work.
Fantastic.
What about removing items from arrays.
That's pretty easy to do as well.
We've got a command for it within Javascript.
And this is spotlight's which allows us to do actually a lot more than just deleting but I'll show you
how we can get rid of one of these tweets.
So let's for example decide that our tweeter decides that his I love coffee tweet was rather inane and
wanted to delete it then we would give the splice command to variables.
Firstly the number of the item in the array that we wanted to start deleting.
So remember morning everybody is the zeroth item.
I love coffee is number one.
And back to work is number two just as it says over here on the left.
So if I wanted to say I love coffee would start at number one because I love coffee is number one.
And then if we just wanted to delete that one then we would say I want to delete one tweet starting
at item 1.
So that should delete just.
I love coffee.
And there we go.
Now you can see we've got left.
Morning everybody.
And back to work.
So what we're doing here is we're passing two variables to this splice function and they give the function
a bit of information.
So it says start deleting at item number 1 and delete one item.
So can you change our splice function so that we delete both.
I love coffee and back to work.
How would we do that.
All right I got it.
All we need today is change the second number to 8 2 and that will then instructed to delete two items
starting at item number 1.
So let's have a look.
We should just be left with.
Morning everybody.
Perfect.
We can also use the splice function to add in items.
So let's say we wanted to add in a tweet before.
I love coffee.
And what we would do is we say I want to add my new tweet at number one.
I don't want to delete any tweets and the content of the new tweet that I want to add in is I don't
know.
Corn Flakes for breakfast.
And of course the requisite exclamation mark.
So they should add in the item cornflakes for breakfast just before.
Item number one.
Let's have a look.
There we go.
So now we've got morning everybody complex for breakfast.
I love coffee.
And back to work very quick challenge for you.
How could you change splice now to instead of just adding in cornflakes for breakfast.
Replace.
I love coffee with cornflakes for breakfast.
Did you manage it.
It's actually pretty straightforward.
We just change the zero to a 1 and this will mean we want to add in a new item before tweet number one.
But we also want to delete tweet number 1 and then add in cornflakes for breakfast so we should now
have just three tweets without.
I love coffee.
There you go.
And you can add in as many items as you like here as well as many inane tweets as you can imagine just
by separating them with comments.
So if our tweeter felt that cornflakes for breakfast wasn't enough information he might add I numb numb
tweet immediately after.
Let's have a look.
Hey we got your number.
Morning everybody.
Complex for breakfast I'm numb and back to work.
All right.
There's a huge amount more that you can do with a raise but that's as far as we're going to go for now
because I don't when you have to memorize lots of different functions.
But as we need them we'll come back to them and see what else we can do with a race.
You'll notice that what we've got here is pure code.
We don't actually have any content in our page at all.
And increasingly in the javascript section and the next section we're going to be looking at more complex
code to do more advanced things and this is really what programming or coding is all about.
It's not so much about the layout of your page as the logic behind it.
And that's where things get really powerful and I think really exciting.
And talking of logic we're going to learn our first logic command in the next video and that is the
if statement.
See you there.